Monday, July 13, 2026
Login/Signup

About 
Stories 
Our Impact
Brand Campaigns
Advertise With Us

About 
Stories 
Our Impact
Brand Campaigns
Advertise With Us

Search...
Home
Topics
About
Stories
Our Impact
Brand Campaigns
Watch Inspiring Videos
Advertise With Us
Press Coverage
Contact
Career at The Better India
Fill your inbox with positivity!
The Better India Weekly Digest
SUBSCRIBE
 Login / Register
Follow Us On

Home Government Education to Health: 14 Govt Schemes for Daughters You Need to Know
Education to Health: 14 Govt Schemes for Daughters You Need to Know
From Beti Bachao Beti Padhao to Sukanya Samriddhi Yojana, know which schemes you are eligible for!

author-image contribution
By Sayantani Nath
 10 Oct 2019
Education to Health: 14 Govt Schemes for Daughters You Need to Know

The Indian constitutional framework envisions an equal society sans any discriminatory practises against girls and women. To ensure the creation of the same, the government of India has implemented several beneficial schemes and policies for the girl child in India.

Here we enlist some of the best schemes for the girl-child rolled out by the Central government as well as individual state governments. 

Add The Better India As A Trusted Source
TBI Logo
1. Beti Bachao Beti Padhao

The popular slogan also happens to be one of the most comprehensive welfare schemes for the girl-child in India. The scheme is specifically aimed to address the sex ratio discrepancy in parts of the country by:

Preventing prenatal gender-biased abortion and postnatal discrimination against daughters
Ensuring holistic growth and protection of the girl-child
Providing equal opportunities for education and participation to the girl-child
Gift your little girl this pretty Peter Pan blouse made entirely out of organic cotton.Available here.

Article Image
#Government
Also read
5 Govt Schemes To Help Your Domestic Help Secure Their Financial Futures
The scheme has presently been implemented in 100 districts of India with a low Child Sex Ratio (CSR), where government officials at Panchayat and district levels work towards elimination of female foeticide and infanticide as well as ensure free elementary education to each and every young girl. 

Click here to learn more about the BBBP scheme: Beti Bachao Beti Padhao 

2. Sukanya Samridhhi Yojana

This scheme offers a savings bank account for a girl-child below 10 years of age where she gets to be the primary account holder with the parent(s)/legal guardian as joint holder(s). 
Regular deposits can be made in the account for 15 years since opening to finance the girl’s education and other future needs. 
The account can be opened at the nearest PSU bank, post-office and select private banks with a minimum initial deposit amount of Rs 1,000. Deposits up to Rs 1.5 lakh annually is permitted. 
A lucrative interest rate (8.4 per cent at present) is available to the beneficiaries. The annual deposit (contributions) also qualifies for Section 80C of tax deduction benefit, with the maturity amount and earned interest being non-taxable.
Learn more about the scheme here: Sukanya Samriddhi Yojana
3. Balika Samriddhi Yojana

This scholarship scheme is particularly dedicated for girl children and their mothers living below the poverty line - in both rural and urban regions. 
Aside from providing educational and survival support, the scheme also targets the eradication of early marriage among girls.
After the birth of a daughter, the mother is provided with a cash benefit of Rs 500.
The girl child can avail annual scholarship between Rs 300 to Rs 1,000 till 10th standard as detailed below:
girl child schemes
Note: Only one girl child per family can avail this scheme.
The forms for Balika Samriddhi Yojana can be downloaded for free at the following links: Rural and Urban.

4. Central Board of Secondary Education (CBSE) Scholarship Scheme/Policy for Girl Education

Launched by CBSE, the scholarship is awarded to female students who are the only child in their families.
Students who have passed Class X board examination with 60 per cent or above score are eligible for this scholarship which will supplement their tuition fees for classes XI & XII.
Their school fees should not exceed Rs 1500 per month.
Rs 500 per month will be transferred to the beneficiary’s account for a period of two years, subject to their promotion to Class XII with 50 per cent or more marks.
To apply for the 2019 scholarship and learn more terms and conditions of the scheme, click here: Single Girl Child Scholarship - 2019

5. National Scheme of Incentives to Girls for Secondary Education

The scheme is particularly aimed for the upliftment of girls from the SC/ST communities through monetary incentives for education. 
Eligibility - 
SC/ST girls who have passed class VII 
All girl students who have passed class VII from Kasturba Gandhi Balika Vidyalayas and have enrolled for class IX in State/UT Government, government-aided or local body schools.
Applicants need to be below 16 years of age on joining class IX
Rs 3,000 is added as a fixed deposit for the selected candidates, which the student can withdraw with interest after passing 10th board examinations and attaining 18 years of age.  
Know more about the scheme here: National Scheme of Incentives to Girls for Secondary Education

6. State government schemes for girl child

Many states have introduced their own welfare schemes for girl children, which can be availed alongside the central government scheme(s). Some of the popular state-based schemes are listed below: 

Andhra Pradesh & Telangana - Girl Child Protection Scheme
The scheme promotes a girl child’s education to minimum up to Intermediate level, while preventing early marriages and empowering girls from an early age. 
The scheme also provides financial benefits to girl children in need.
Families with no more than two children comprising two or at least one daughter are eligible.
To know all terms and conditions of the scheme, click here: Girl child protection scheme 
Tamil Nadu - Sivagami Ammaiyar Memorial girl child protection scheme
The TN government scheme targets the eradication of female infanticide while endorsing gender-neutral family planning measures and supporting the welfare of girl children from less privileged families
Girl child schemes
Click here to know more: Sivagami Ammaiyar Memorial girl child protection scheme
Madhya Pradesh -Ladli Laxmi Yojana
To eradicate the malpractices of child marriage and female foeticide, the Madhya Pradesh government provides financial benefits to families with one or more girl child(ren), who are mandated to attend Anganwadi schools. 
Following approval, Rs 6,000 worth of National Saving Certificates (NSC) will be purchased annually for 5 years in the girl child’s name.  
Girl child schemes
Know more about the scheme here: Ladli Laxmi Yojana
Haryana - Ladli Scheme
In the state infamous for its lopsided CSR, the state government now offers Rs. 5,000/- per year for upto five years to families with a second girl child, which will be released once the beneficiary attains adulthood.
Know more about the Haryana Ladli Scheme
Odisha - Kishori Shakti Yojana
The Odisha government’s scheme aims to provide nutritional, educational and financial support to adolescent girls in the state - between 11 to 18 years of age.
More details are provided here: Kishori Shakti Yojana
Rajasthan - Rajshree Yojna
This amazing scheme provides a total financial assistance of up to Rs 50,000 to a girl child’s family for her educational, health and other expenses up to class XII. 
The detailed break-up is shown:
Girl child schemes
Find out more about the scheme here: Rajshree Yojna
Maharashtra - Majhi Kanya Bhagyashree
Any family Below Poverty Line (BPL) with one or more girl children in Maharashtra is eligible for this scheme. 
The beneficiary can avail the financial benefits as detailed below: 
Girl child schemes
Click here to know more details about this scheme: Majhi Kanya Bhagyashree
West Bengal - Kanyashree Prakalpa
This hugely successful scheme rolled out by the West Bengal government has bagged the first prize at the United Nations among 552 international projects in the Public Service category.
The scheme offers an annual scholarship of Rs 750 to girls between the ages of 13 and 18 years and a one-time grant of Rs 25,000 for girls between the ages of 18 and 19 years.
For more details, visit the website: https://www.wbkanyashree.gov.in/kp_4.0/index.php
Karnataka - Bhagyalaxmi scheme 
The main goal of this scheme is to hail the birth of girl child in BPL families and enhance the social, educational and overall status of the girl child in general.
The beneficiary is eligible for a health insurance cover of up to Rs 25,000 per year, alongside educational scholarship of Rs 300 to Rs 1,000 up to Class X.
Girl child schemes
Click here for further details: Bhagyalaxmi Scheme
Also Read: Secure Your Child's Future: 6 Investments Plans You Need To Check Out Today!

(Edited by Saiqua Sultan)

Like this story? Or have something to share?
Write to us: contact@thebetterindia.com
Connect with us on Facebook and Twitter.
Tags: awarenesshealthcarewomen empowermentBeti Bachao Beti PadhaoEducationfemale literacygovernment schemesgirl child schemesbeneficiary schemesgovernment policy
You May Also like
5 Govt Schemes To Help Your Domestic Help Secure Their Financial Futures
5 Govt Schemes To Help Your Domestic Help Secure Their Financial Futures
By Shivani Gupta  Nov 12 2023
Want to help your domestic help become financially secure? Help them apply for these 5 government schemes to save, invest and insure for their future.

Female Genital Mutilation Violates Fundamental Rights, Says Supreme Court
Criticism of Govt is Not Sedition: 1962 Kedar Nath Verdict Behind SC Ruling Explained
By Vidya Raja  Jun 04 2021
Criticism of Govt is Not Sedition: 1962 Kedar Nath Verdict Behind SC Ruling Explained. Click Here To Read What It Means.

Confused About Which Posts on Social Media Are Ads? These Guidelines Will Help
Confused About Which Posts on Social Media Are Ads? These Guidelines Will Help
By Vidya Raja  Feb 24 2021
Confused About Which Posts on Social Media Are Ads? These Guidelines Will Help. Everything You Need To Know About ASCI's Guidelines.

With This Policy, Citizens Can Raise Concerns Against Bills Before They Become Laws
With This Policy, Citizens Can Raise Concerns Against Bills Before They Become Laws
By Guest Contributor  Jan 08 2021
The Pre-Legislative Consultation Process (PLCP) gives us a chance to ensure that future laws reflect the needs of the citizens by providing an avenue for redressals. Read on to know how you can make your voice count.

Should You Wear a Mask in Your Car & Can You Get Fined For Not Wearing One?
Should You Wear a Mask in Your Car & Can You Get Fined For Not Wearing One?
By Rinchen Norbu Wangchuk  Nov 23 2020
Curious whether you need to wear a face mask in your car? Read on to know the rules and penalties in different cities.

BEL Opens Vacancies For Engineers With Salary upto Rs. 1,20,000: Check Eligibility
BEL Opens Vacancies For Engineers With Salary upto Rs. 1,20,000: Check Eligibility
By Roshini Muthukumar  Oct 01 2020
BEL recruitment is being conducted at the Ghaziabad unit for 10 senior assistant engineer vacancies. Check your eligibility and apply now.

Read the Next Article
Home Government 5 Govt Schemes To Help Your Domestic Help Secure Their Financial Futures
5 Govt Schemes To Help Your Domestic Help Secure Their Financial Futures
Want to help your domestic help become financially secure? Help them apply for these 5 government schemes to save, invest and insure for their future.

author-image contribution
By Shivani Gupta
 12 Nov 2023
5 Govt Schemes To Help Your Domestic Help Secure Their Financial Futures

Although domestic workers provide crucial services to millions of households every day, often they are denied minimum wages and exploited for long working hours. The community of domestic workers remained hard-hit, especially during the COVID-19 pandemic-induced lockdown when nearly 60 percent remained unpaid.

The official statistics by the International Labour Organization (ILO) place the number of domestic staffers employed in India as 4.75 million, but this is considered a severe underestimation. And the true number is between 20 million and 80 million workers. Even today, a large army of this unorganised sector continues to toil without any social security cover.

Add The Better India As A Trusted Source
TBI Logo
If you wish to help your domestic staffers, here are five government schemes with which you can help them secure their lives financially.

Pradhan Mantri Jan Dhan Yojana
In 2014, the Indian government started this financial inclusion programme to encourage citizens to avail of various financial services — such as remittances, credit, insurance, and pensions. It does not require to maintain a minimum balance.

Where to apply: Accounts can be opened in any bank branch or Business Correspondent (Bank Mitra) outlet. Click here to learn more and download the form.

Often, domestic workers are denied minimum wages and exploited for long working hours.
Often, domestic workers are denied minimum wages and exploited for long working hours.
Pradhan Mantri Suraksha Bima Yojana
This government-backed insurance scheme offers accidental death and disability cover for death or disability on account of an accident. The cover shall be for the one-year period which is renewable from year to year.

All savings bank account holders in the age bracket of 18 to 70 years are entitled to join. For death, a sum of Rs 2 lakh is insured; Rs 2 lakh for total and irrecoverable loss of both eyes or loss of use of both hands or feet or loss of sight of one eye and loss of use of hand or foot; whereas Rs 1 lakh for total and irrecoverable loss of sight of one eye or loss of use of one hand or foot.

Where to apply: Click here to fill out the application form.

Atal Pension Yojana
A fixed monthly income will ensure a dignified life in old age when domestic helps are often without any financial support.

Primarily targeted at the unorganised sector, this pension scheme provides a minimum monthly pension of Rs 1,000 at the age of 60 years. Any citizen in the age group of 18 to 40 years is eligible for this benefit.

Where to apply: Approach the bank branch/post office where individuals’ savings bank account is held. Provide the bank account number/post office savings bank account number. Then, with the help of the bank staff, fill up the APY registration form and provide the Aadhaar/mobile number. Ensure to keep the required balance in the savings bank account/post office savings bank account for the transfer of monthly/quarterly/half-yearly contributions. Click here to know more details.

The pension scheme provides a minimum monthly pension of Rs 1,000 at the age of 60 years. 
The pension scheme provides a minimum monthly pension of Rs 1,000 at the age of 60 years.
Ayushman Bharat Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana
The government-backed national public health insurance scheme aims to provide free access to health insurance coverage for low-income people in the country.

The scheme gives a benefit cover of Rs 5 lakh per family per year. This cover takes care of almost all secondary care and most tertiary care procedures. This scheme does not have any cap on family size and age. It ensures that any member of the family — especially women, children, and the elderly — can avail of the scheme.

Where to apply: To avail of this scheme, the beneficiaries are required to submit documents including identity proof and income certificate. The maximum annual income of the beneficiary should be only up to Rs 5 lakh a year. Click here to apply for the scheme.

Pradhan Mantri Matru Vandana Yojana
This government scheme can be availed by domestic staffers during pregnancy and after the birth of their first child.

This maternity benefit programme is a conditional cash transfer scheme that provides a cash incentive of Rs 5,000 in three instalments for pregnant and lactating mothers of 19 years of age or above.

Where to apply: This service allows beneficiaries to register themselves for the PMMVY scheme. To receive the cash benefit, apply here.

Edited by Pranita Bhat

Tags: domestic workersfinancial securitygovernment schemes
Read the Next Article
Home Government Criticism of Govt is Not Sedition: 1962 Kedar Nath Verdict Behind SC Ruling Explained
Criticism of Govt is Not Sedition: 1962 Kedar Nath Verdict Behind SC Ruling Explained
Quashing the sedition case against journalist Vinod Dua, the Supreme Court drew on the 1962 Kedar Nath Singh verdict. Here's what this judgment held.

author-image contribution
By Vidya Raja
 04 Jun 2021
Female Genital Mutilation Violates Fundamental Rights, Says Supreme Court
Supreme Court of India (Source: Supreme Court of India/Facebook)


"Someone’s statement criticising the government does not invoke an offence of sedition or defamation.” - Supreme Court of India.

Introduced by the British during the colonial era, Section 124A of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) has been used to punish sedition (conduct or speech inciting people to rebel against the authority of a state) as an “offence against the state,” and was used to arrest freedom fighters during the British Raj. Subsequently, on various occasions, successive governments have used this provision against political dissenters.

Add The Better India As A Trusted Source
TBI Logo
In January this year, senior journalists and even politicians from the opposition party were booked for posting tweets and “deliberately spreading misinformation during the farmers protest”.

Moreover, in the year 2020, Vinod Dua, a journalist and recipient of the Ramnath Goenka Excellence in Journalism Award posted a video on YouTube in which he criticised the ruling government’s handling of the COVID-19 lockdown and, in particular, talked about the mass migrant exodus in 2020.
Sedition 
Vinod Dua
Following this, a case of sedition was filed against him under Section 124A of the IPC. During the hearing, Solicitor General Tushar Mehta, who was appearing on behalf of the Himachal Pradesh government, argued in the Supreme Court that Dua had “attempted to spread misinformation or incorrect information and cause panic in the perception of the general public” — “for example, the statement that some people feared that there could be food riots post lockdown was without any basis and had clear potential of spreading panic.”

What the Supreme Court held
Supreme Court of India. (Source: Wikimedia Commons)
Supreme Court of India. (Source: Wikimedia Commons)
Quashing the case, the Supreme Court bench comprising Justice U U Lalit and Justice Vineet Saran held that Dua’s remarks constituted genuine criticism of the government and could not be labelled seditious. The court further held, “Every journalist is entitled to protection under the Kedar Nath Singh judgment (the famous verdict of 1962 on the scope and ambit of offence of sedition in the IPC).”

The bench extensively relied on the principles outlined in the Kedar Nath judgment to give relief to Dua.

So what should we know about the Kedar Nath Singh verdict?
Kedar Nath Singh was a member of the Forward Communist Party from Bihar. In 1953, he got into trouble after he took on the ruling government during a rally at Begusarai.
At that rally, he had said, “Today, the dogs of CBI are loitering around Barauni [in Begusarai]. Many official dogs are sitting even in this meeting. The people of India drove out the British from the country and elected these Congress goondas to the gaddi. As we drove out the British, we shall strike and drive out these Congress goondas as well. They have today established a rule of lathis [and] bullets in the country. We believe in revolution which will come, and in the flame of which, capitalists, zamindars and Congress leaders will be reduced to ashes, and on their ashes will be established a government of the poor and the downtrodden people of India.”
Following the speech he made, Kedar Nath was convicted and imprisoned by a first class magistrate on sedition charges.
An appeal made by Kedar Nath to the Patna High Court was struck down.
While the 1962 verdict upheld the constitutional validity of sedition law in India, it did hold free speech, discussions on matters of government functioning and their criticism, and freedom of press as “essential for the proper functioning of the processes of popular government.”
It also held that “comments, however strongly worded, expressing disapprobation of actions of the Government, without exciting those feelings which generate the inclination to cause public disorder by acts of violence” would not attract the penal offence.
The bench also said that every journalist will be entitled to protection under the 1962 judgment.
In its 1962 verdict, the court had held the accused (Kedar Nath Singh) guilty of sedition.
The judgment was delivered by a bench constituted of Chief Justice B P Sinha and Justices A K Sarkar, J R Mudholkar, N Rajagopala Ayyangar and S K Das.
(Edited by Divya Sethu)

Tags: IndiaCongressLawssupreme courtFIRGovernmentlegalSeditionrajdeep sardesaiVinod DuabookedquashedKedar Nath SIngh
Read the Next Article
Home Government Confused About Which Posts on Social Media Are Ads? These Guidelines Will Help
Confused About Which Posts on Social Media Are Ads? These Guidelines Will Help
The Advertising Standards Council of India (ASCI), a self-regulatory body, has released a set of draft guidelines for social media influencers for ad content and more. Here's what you need to know.

author-image contribution
By Vidya Raja
 24 Feb 2021
Confused About Which Posts on Social Media Are Ads? These Guidelines Will Help

One particular post on a rather famous online community was getting several comments praising a hair oil. This was in response to a member’s question on how to tackle hair fall. The member was happy with the responses and promptly went ahead and placed an order for the oil. About a month later, she posted yet again describing how terrible the oil turned out to be. She felt cheated and asked why the other members had praised the product so much.

A little probing was all it took to find out that several of the posts on that thread were made by social media influencers who were, in fact, beneficiaries of the company and many of whom had not even bought or tried the product themselves. This is just one case where swayed by social media influencers, an unsuspecting customer went ahead and made a purchase.

Add The Better India As A Trusted Source
TBI Logo
In a bid to streamline online advertising that many social media influencers indulge in, the Advertising Standards Council of India (ASCI) has released draft guidelines for influencer advertising on digital media platforms. The regulatory body is inviting the public to send in recommendations, suggestions, ideas, on or before 8 March 2021 on these guidelines.

Anupriya Kapur, a social media influencer from Gurugram with a 1.4 lakh follower base on Instagram, says, “This is a much-needed move, given how rapidly this space is growing. Some of the guidelines I particularly want to applaud are the non-usage of filters in the pictures and ensuring that influencers do their own due diligence before signing on a brand.”

She also adds that as someone who has been a part of the space for long, she has made some mistakes herself and signed on brands that she later felt did not sit well with her own personal ethos.
Social Media
Anupriya Kapur
“This will now force influencers to think about which brands they sign on and how they represent them,” she says.

Speaking to The Better India, Manisha Kapoor, Secretary-General, ASCI, said, “While these are draft guidelines and we are inviting the public to send in their recommendations and suggestions, we are confident of retaining the guidelines in spirit.” She also mentions that one of the significant changes that these guidelines is acknowledging is the power that social media influencers have. As a consumer, it is a matter of right to know when you are being sold something, or are viewing an advertisement and the guidelines will make that distinction.

“At the heart of the guidelines is for consumers to know that an advertisement is just that,” she adds. It then helps make the consumer take an informed decision of whether or not they wish to by the product or service. The guidelines require influencers to disclose that the communication they are putting out is an advertisement.

The guidelines apply to Instagram, Facebook, Twitter, Pinterest, YouTube and other video platforms, vlogs, Snapchat and blogs.
publive-image
What social media platform are you on?
Speaking about the social media platforms, she says, “We have had representations from various platforms and many of them were also part of the task force that came up with these guidelines,” she says.

Draft Guidelines for social media influencer advertising on digital media
1) Any advertisement that is displayed must be easily distinguishable. A disclosure label must be added from the list of approved labels.

2) The disclosure label used to highlight advertising content needs to be upfront.

3) The disclosure label must be in English or translated into the language of the advertisement in a way that it is well understood by anyone who is viewing the advertisement.

4) Blanket disclosures in a profile/bio/about section will not be considered adequate.

5) If the advertisement is only a picture post, such as Instagram stories or Snapchat, the label needs to be superimposed over the picture.

6) In the case of video not accompanied by a text post, the disclosure label should be superimposed on the video.

7) In the case of audio media, the disclosure label must be clearly announced at the beginning and at the end of the audio.

8) Filters should not be applied to social media advertisements if they exaggerate the effect of the claim that the brand is making such as ‘makes hair shinier’, ‘teeth whiter’, etc.

9) The influencer must do their due diligence about any technical or performance claims made by them such as 2X better, effect lasts for 1 month, fastest speed, best in class etc.

10) It is recommended that the contractual agreement between advertiser and influencer carries clauses pertaining to disclosure, use of filters as well as due diligence.

How can a consumer lodge a complaint?
Social Media 
Manisha Kapoor
ASCI’s main role is to prevent misleading advertisements. In this endeavour, there is a central WhatsApp number accessible to everyone in the country, where complaints can be lodged. Other than this, the following ways can be used to reach ASCI.

A letter addressed to The Secretary General, the Advertising Standards Council of India, 219 Bombay Market, Tardeo, Mumbai 400 034 can be sent in.
Log into ASCI’s website and register a complaint. There is a form available, which needs to be filled out with relevant details. Once done, a tracking number will be provided to help keep tab of the case progress.
You can call on 022 23513982 or 022 23521066 or 1-800-22 –2724 (toll free) as well to lodge your complaint.
You could also send your complaint to +91 77100 12345, which is available on WhatsApp.
If the complaint is complete, the decision will be taken by ASCI’s Consumer Complaints Council (CCC) within an approximate period of a month.
Manisha adds that in 2020, through various channels, ASCI processed more than 7,700 complaints. If you wish to access the social media influencer draft guideline, click here. Suggestions and recommendations to the guidelines can be sent to [email protected] on or before 8 March 2021.

(Edited by Yoshita Rao)

Tags: IndiafacebookYoutubesocial mediainstagramsnapchatAnupriya KapurguidelinesASCI
Read the Next Article
Home Government With This Policy, Citizens Can Raise Concerns Against Bills Before They Become Laws
With This Policy, Citizens Can Raise Concerns Against Bills Before They Become Laws
The Pre-Legislative Consultation Process (PLCP) gives us a chance to ensure that future laws reflect the needs of the citizens by providing an avenue for redressals. Read on to know how you can make your voice count.

author-image contribution
By Guest Contributor
 08 Jan 2021
With This Policy, Citizens Can Raise Concerns Against Bills Before They Become Laws
Pic source: Shutterstock


Democracy is often identified with participation and participation is a fundamental aspect of any democracy. While voting is one way we participate in democratic processes, the Pre-Legislative Consultation Policy (PLCP) provides a way through which we can become pro-active citizens in our day-to-day lives. It provides citizens with a channel to provide their feedback and comments on future laws. This piece aims to cover the basics of the pre-legislative consultation policy and how one can participate in the process to make their voices heard.

What is the Pre-Legislative Consultation Policy (PLCP)?
It is a process through which citizens engage with the government by providing feedback and comments on policies and draft bills. A draft bill is a proposal made to the Parliament to become a law. It is this draft bill that is placed before the public for their feedback. Prior to 2014, this process was not uniformly recognised or followed consistently.

Add The Better India As A Trusted Source
TBI Logo
However, in 2014, the Central government introduced the PLCP. Under this, it has been mandated that every Ministry must place draft bills in the public domain for comments/feedback for 30 days. The document put out for public consultation should also provide reasons for the need of the law, financial considerations and explanation of legal terms in simple language. The document is also required to cover the possible impact it could have on the citizens and their fundamental rights. It is only after the completion of this process that the draft is sent for approval to the Cabinet.

How is the policy being implemented currently?
The 2014 policy required every Ministry to publish the draft bills on their websites and any other means through which it could reach a wider set of citizens. In case, the law impacts a specific group of people, it is the duty of the Ministry to ensure the relevant information reaches the group concerned. The feedback and comments are made public on the Ministry’s website as well. Since 2017, the number of laws which are opened for public feedback are growing at a rate of 111%.

The main issues being faced by the government are in terms of awareness of the
Pre-legislative consultation process. At times consultations are put out in the public domain but there are no responses from the citizens. On the other hand, large volumes of feedback are often not processed because of internal capacity constraints.

How can you participate in the pre-legislative consultation process?
Taking part in this process can seem intimidating as all of us are not familiar with legal language. However, the policy requires each department to release the key objectives of a draft bill when calling for public comments. This makes it easy to go through the draft bills. User-friendly platforms like Civis —a non-profit organisation that makes it easy for you to find out about the upcoming laws and policies, and MyGov also regularly update the bills up for consultation along with a summary of the draft bill in simple language, free of any legal jargon. While websites like OurGov.In aggregate all laws open for public feedback.

On Civis, one can submit their own feedback on the site and see other responses as well. It gives one the opportunity to understand what your fellow citizens feel about a particular issue. This facilitates public dialogue. All of the feedback from the Civis platform is then conveyed to the appropriate government department, and updates to the law are shared with citizen leaders.

One can also participate by spreading awareness about the pre-legislative consultation policy. This can be done by sharing one’s own feedback on various channels and encouraging people to do the same. This will also tackle the issue of awareness being faced by the government. The more citizens get involved, the higher the success of the process.

Why should you participate in the PLCP?
As we currently witness the protests of the Farm Bills we know that laws have a huge impact on all aspects of our lives. The PLCP gives us a chance to ensure that future laws reflect the needs of the citizens. It also provides an avenue for us citizens to bring to the notice of the government the concerns they may have with the draft bill. Through participation in the public consultation process, we contribute towards creating a vibrant and proactive citizen body.

Written by Kopal Mittal, Research Fellow, Civis; Edited by Yoshita Rao

Tags: DemocracyLawsGovernmentVotePLCPdraft billsCivispre-legislative consultation process
Read the Next Article
Home Healthcare Should You Wear a Mask in Your Car & Can You Get Fined For Not Wearing One?
Should You Wear a Mask in Your Car & Can You Get Fined For Not Wearing One?
Curious whether you need to wear a mask in your car? Read on to know the rules in different cities.

author-image contribution
By Rinchen Norbu Wangchuk
 23 Nov 2020
Should You Wear a Mask in Your Car & Can You Get Fined For Not Wearing One?
Photo Source: Flickr


At a time when doctors are urging people to wear their masks in public places as a precautionary measure against COVID-19, different states and cities have issued their own directives.

As per the Ministry of Home Affairs’ National Directive for COVID-19 Management, “Wearing of face cover is compulsory in public places; in workplaces; and during transport.”

Add The Better India As A Trusted Source
TBI Logo
But the question of whether a fine is imposed on motorists not wearing a mask in their vehicles seemingly depends on whether authorities in a given state or city deem your personal car a ‘public palace’ or not while on the road.

In a July 2019 judgement, the Supreme Court held that a car or any other private passenger vehicle “shall be deemed to be a public place in view of the fact that when a private vehicle is passing through a public road, it cannot be accepted that the public have no access to it. It is true that the public may not have access to such a private vehicle as a matter of right but the public have the opportunity to approach the private vehicle while it is on the public road.”

This was a judgement passed based on a criminal case filed pertaining to drunk driving.

Here's how some of our major cities have addressed the issue of wearing masks in cars:

Face mask
Photo Source: Flickr

Delhi: Wearing a mask is compulsory in personal and official vehicles, irrespective of whether you’re travelling alone or not, as per the Delhi government. Earlier this week, they argued before the Delhi High Court that a personal vehicle cannot be said to be a “private zone”. The Delhi government has raised the fine amount to Rs 2,000 from Rs 500.

Mumbai: According to a directive issued on 29 June, “Any person who is moving around in his personal or official vehicle must compulsorily weark mask.” This is very similar to the guidelines issued by the Delhi Disaster Management Authority (DDMA) in April, which the Delhi government is using to justify its position. The Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation states that those not wearing masks outside their homes will have to pay a fine of Rs 1,000.

Bengaluru: The city’s municipal authority, the Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP), issued an order on 2 November clarifying that a person driving a four-wheeler alone with his/her windows pulled up completely need not wear a mask. But a person riding a two-wheeler, without a pillion rider, must wear one. Just a week prior to this order, however, the BBMP said it was compulsory for motorists to wear masks while traveling irrespective of whether they’re alone or not. Not wearing a mask in a public place entails a fine of Rs 250.

Chennai: Greater Chennai Corporation Commissioner G Prakash’s office has told this publication that if you’re driving alone in your car, it’s not necessary to wear a mask, although just out of precaution, they have advised people to wear masks at all times. The fine amount imposed for not wearing a mask in public places is Rs 200.

Hyderabad: Residents of the city have to pay a Rs 1,000 fine, if they don't wear a mask in a public place. The authorities have issued no specifications around whether you're inside your car or not. Similarly, Kolkata has not issued any specific directive or order in this regard as well.

face mask
Photo Source: Flickr
Meanwhile, senior officials of the Central government have been non-committal on the issue. In early September, the health secretary clarified that the Union health ministry issued no directive on whether a motorist has to wear a mask if they are alone in a car. However, he added that the traffic police can still impose a fine if there is more than one passenger.

Whether cities and state governments should impose fines on motorists for not wearing masks while commuting alone is a debate that requires closer inspection. Having said that, it’s advisable for citizens to wear masks at all times. Why risk it?

(Edited Yoshita Rao)

Tags: bengaluruMumbaiDelhiChennaiface maskcarCoronaviruscovid-19
Read the Next Article
Home Government BEL Opens Vacancies For Engineers With Salary upto Rs. 1,20,000: Check Eligibility
BEL Opens Vacancies For Engineers With Salary upto Rs. 1,20,000: Check Eligibility
The recruitment is being conducted at Bharat Electronics Limited’s Ghaziabad unit for 10 senior assistant engineer vacancies.

author-image contribution
By Roshini Muthukumar
 01 Oct 2020
BEL Opens Vacancies For Engineers With Salary upto Rs. 1,20,000: Check Eligibility

Bharat Electronics Limited (BEL), an organisation that is focussed on manufacturing advanced electronics for the Indian Armed Forces, is recruiting engineers for 10 vacancies.

The recruitment is being conducted at Ghaziabad and it is mentioned in the official advertisement that the public sector undertaking is looking to recruit senior assistant engineers’ on a fixed-term basis. Selected candidates will be eligible for a salary ranging from Rs.30,000 to Rs 1,20,000.

Add The Better India As A Trusted Source
TBI Logo
There are three strategic business units with different vacant posts available:

ANTENNA
Vacancies - 2

Eligibility criteria - 3 years Diploma or equivalent degree in an electrical discipline.

Experience - Ex-servicemen from Army, Navy & Air Force in the rank of Junior Commissioned Officer (JCO) or above with min. 15 years of post-qualification experience.

Post location and duties- Selected candidates will be posted at BEL Ghaziabad and required to visit customer sites across India for maintenance of various projects.

Tenure - 3 years

SCCS
Vacancies - 6

Eligibility criteria: 3 years Diploma or equivalent engineering degree in Electronics or Electronics & Communications.

Experience: Ex-Servicemen from Indian Army in the rank of Junior Commissioned Officer (JCO) or above with 15 years of post-qualification experience.

Location of the post: Jammu & Kashmir (Srinagar/ Kupwara/ Jammu/ Rajouri)

Tenure: 5 years

RADAR
Vacancies - 2

Eligibility criteria: 3 years diploma in electronics or any equivalent qualification.

Experience: Ex-servicemen from IAF in the rank of Junior Warrant Officer (JWO) or above with 15 Yrs of post-qualification experience.

Post location and duties: BEL, Ghaziabad. Selected candidates will be required to visit IAF sites across India for the maintenance of THD radar.

Tenure: 3 years

How to apply:
Step 1: Make a payment for your application here and get a copy of the receipt.

Step 2: Take a copy of the application form at the end of the official notification.

Step 3: Fill in the form and attach a passport size photograph.

Step 4: Prepare self-attested copies of necessary documents such as educational certificates, age proof and more.

Step 5: The form, documents, and payment receipt should be sent to - Bharat Electronics Limited Ghaziabad, P.O. Bharat Nagar, Sahibabad, Ghaziabad(U.P.)-201010.

The last day to pay the application fee is 24th October, and the post has to be sent across before 27th October.

Things to remember:
Remember to address the post to DGM(HR).
The age limit to apply for the post is 50 years.
The candidate should have retired from the Army / Navy / Air Force on or before 30.09.2020
If you have any queries on payment of application fee, you access this document to know more.
If you have any queries you can access the official notification here. Or send an email to [email protected].

(Edited by Vinayak Hegde)

Tags: government jobBELbharath electronics ltdhow to applygovernment job applicationgovernment job vacancy
Subscribe to our Newsletter!

Your Name
Email address
Subscribe Now
SHARE YOUR STORY
editorial@thebetterindia.com
SHARE YOUR FEEDBACK
contact@thebetterindia.com
FOLLOW US
Quick Links

Advertise With Us
Work with us
Contact Us
Privacy Policy
Terms of use
Grievance
Sustainability Stories
Startup Stories
Travel Stories
Farming Stories
Education Stories
Health care Stories
Visual Stories
Changemakers Stories
Culture Stories
History Stories
Food Stories
Innovation Stories
Wildlife Stories
